---
title: "[Vulkan]-101"
date: 2022-11-10 08:32:00+0900
categories: [ComputerGraphics, Vulkan]
tags: [Vulkan, Study, Basic]
math: true
---

# Introduction To Vulkan

## What is Vulkan ?
> Cross platform graphics API(Application Program Interface)

Suited for multithreaded application, Vulkan is designed to benifit from its ***explicitness*** when it comes to developing applications. This lowers the workload for graphic driver(Other graphics api like openGL makes graphic driver do all the guess work). Vulkan is written in C, and has various wrapper for most of the popular languages like C++, Rust and etc. 

## Validation Layer & Vulkan Loader
Vulkan's Architecture is whats known as "Layered Architecture". `Vulkan Loader` manages the layer-chain(Also does a whole lot but we will ignore them for now). This comes with a big benifit being that we can easily swap out unwanted layer functionality anytime. It works just like how we build our application in *Release configuration* when its about to get shipped for service. During developement, we can add layers like Vulkan API Tracing, Vulkan API Usage Validation and more between the chain for debugging purpose and simply remove them with macros when shipping. OpenGL could not remove any of its validation features because of its design so application made with it had to take the risk(Application running validation layers hits CPU usage rate quite a bit).  
Validation Layer is not absolute, meaning that it does not catch bugs outside of vulkan mainly being memory issues(pointers, uninitialized memory, etc). Catching wrong vulkan function usage, enums, object lifetime, incorrect configuration values are what validation layers are for. 
> **TLDR**   
> When developing with vulkan, use validation layers as debugging option for each specific usecase. 

## Fundamentals
Everything(mostly) in Vulkan is managed as `Objects`. Devices, Queues, Buffers, and other entities are all considered as **Objects** that you as a developer have to manage. Unlike OpenGL and DirectX(except 12), Vulkan doesn't do anything for you. Every object managment is done by the developer, so you need to plan out what and when Vulkan objects are created. 

Vulkan explicitly seperates state management and rendering. State validation happens before rendering when creating the object. This makes the rendering process much more lighter.

This idea applies to GPU commands as well. We first store all those GPU works inside a `CommandBuffer`. This gets submitted into a `Queue`(specific queue for said functionality). `Buffer` objects needs to get allocated (in a efficient way) and operation order after submitting it into `Queue` can also be controlled.

Frame is also handled by the developer. Using `swapchain` developer can manage how the screen is shown like double/triple buffering. If your application needs it you can just send the result data strait to other application referencing the result(you can also just save those data inside a disk if you want to). Vulkan not used for rendering to screen is called *Headless mode*.

## Render Flow

The following table lists some basic Vulkan Objects...

Vulkan Objects      |   Usage
:---------------    |:-------------
VkInstance          | The Vulkan Context Where everything starts. Used to access the driver.
VkPhysicalDevice    | Your actual GPU. You can pick specific GPU that matches your applications needs.
VkDevice            | Sort of wrapper that you actually use when rendering(or any other task).
VkBuffer            | Chunk of GPU memory. (Actually you can decide where and how this memor functions using `HOST` and `DEVICE` option)
VkImage             | Multi-Dimension(up to 3) arrays of data for various usage(mostly texture & attachments)
VkPipeline          | Pipeline that Vulkan goes through to render stuff. Holds state of the GPU that you need when rendering that specific thing(shader, rasterization option, depth, etc...)
VkRenderPass        |  Holds information of the *image* that you are rendering into. All draw calls happend inside a renderpass.
VkFrameBuffer       | Contains information(color, depth buffer and more) for renderPass. Its produced by the pipeline.
VkCommandBuffer     | Buffer storing command that is getting performed inside the GPU.
VkQueue             | Some sort of an interface. Each queue has its own designated functionality and only take matching commandBuffer(Graphic, Memory Allocation, and other functionality). Submitted commandBuffer gets copied inside GPU for execution.
VkDescriptorSet     | Similar to uniform variable(Not exactly the same). It binds resource data for the shader to use.(Data like buffer, buffer/image view, sampler or combined image sampler).
VkSwapchainKHR      | Holds images to render to the screen(FrameBuffer). `KHR` is used for extension objects. Extensions should get included during setup phase. In this case we need `VK_KHR_swapchain`.
VkSemaphore         | Used to manage multiple queue operation order submitted commandBuffer. 
VkFence             | Synchronization just like `VkSemaphore`, `VkFence` is used to alert the `HOST` when task running inside `DEVICE` is done.

***Basic Flow***

    [Engine Initialization]     ---->      [Asset Initialization] ----> [Render Loop] 
        (a) Instance                              VkPipeline           VkSwapchainKHR 
                V   -> Extension                      V                      V    -> VkCommandBufferPool 
        (b) PhysicalDevice                         VkBuffer            VkCommandBuffer 
                V   -> Feature                     VkImage                   V    -> start CommandBuffer
        (c) VkDevice                                  V                Start VkRenderPass
                |   -> Queue Family               VkRenderPass               V
                V   -> Features from (b)                                Bind resource
        (d) VkQueue Handles                                                  |    -> VkPipeline
            VkCommandPool                                                    V    -> VkDescriptorSet and more
                V                                                       End VkRenderPass
        (r) VkSwapchainKHR                                                   V    -> end CommandBuffer
                                                                        Submit CommandBuffer


## 